PEP 679: Modify proposal and improve sections (#4575)
python/peps: peps/pep-0679.rst

PEP: 679
Title: New assert statement syntax with parentheses
Author: Pablo Galindo Salgado <pablogsal@python.org>,
        Stan Ulbrych <stanulbrych@gmail.com>,
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 07-Jan-2022
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `10-Jan-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-679-allow-parentheses-in-assert-statements/13003>`__

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes allowing parentheses in the two-argument form of :keyword:`assert`.
The interpreter will reinterpret ``assert (expr, msg)`` as ``assert expr, msg``,

> eliminating the common `footgun <https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/footgun>`_

Reviewer: “pitfall” or “problem” might not need a Wikipedia link.

other grammar constructs::

    assert (
      very very long
      test,

      "very very long "
      "message"
    )

Rationale
=========

Due to backwards compatibility concerns (see section below), to inform users
of the new change of how what was previously a two element tuple is parsed,
a :exc:`SyntaxWarning` with a message like
``"new assertion syntax, will assert first element of tuple"``
will be raised till Python 3.17. For example, when using the new syntax:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> assert ('Petr' == 'Pablo', "That doesn't look right!")
    <python-input-0>:0: SyntaxWarning: new assertion syntax, will assert first element of tuple
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<python-input-0>", line 1, in <module>
        assert ('Petr' == 'Pablo', "That doesn't look right!")
                ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    AssertionError: That doesn't look right!

Note that improving syntax warnings in general
is out of the scope of this PEP.

Specification
=============

The formal grammar of the :keyword:`assert` statement will change to:

.. code-block:: bnf

    assert_stmt ::= "assert" expression [',' expression]

>                     | "assert" '(' expression [',' expression] [','] ')'

Reviewer: Doesn't the parenthesized version need to go first?

Reviewer 2: I need to redo this section to adapt to the PEG parser

Reviewer 2: @StanFromIreland why the termination lookahead?  `&(NEWLINE | ';')`? Maybe I am missing something but there is no need to force termination as the follow set of `simple_stmt` already contain `NEWLINE` or `;`.

Author: Grammar updated, footnote added:-)

The second case will raise a :exc:`SyntaxWarning` till 3.17.

> Optionally, a new "invalid" grammar rule can be added to the parser to

Reviewer: > Optionally

Is this proposed or not?

Author: cc @pablogsal thoughts? I am neutral.

Author: Sounds good to me!

promote the current :exc:`SyntaxWarning` to a :exc:`SyntaxError` in the
case of tuples with 0, 1, 3 or more elements.

> Implementation Notes

Reviewer: The specification now calls for a grammar change, so “Implementing in the compiler” can go to Rejected ideas.

Author: I think it is not, the compiler section notes that in 3.18 (no more warning), using the specified grammar,

> the implementation can be moved to the parser level

Giving us the proper AST.

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/python/peps/pull/4575#discussion_r2330229569

of length two. This however, will have the side-effect of not modifying the
AST whatsoever during the transition period while the :exc:`SyntaxWarning`
is being emitted.

Once the :exc:`SyntaxWarning` is removed, the implementation
can be moved to the parser level, where the parenthesized form would be
parsed directly into the same AST structure as ``assert expression, message``.
This approach is more backwards-compatible, as the many tools that deal with
ASTs will have more time to adapt.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The change is not technically backwards compatible. Whether implemented initially
in the parser or the compiler, ``assert (x,y)``,
which is currently interpreted as an assert statement with a 2-tuple as the
subject and is always truth-y, will be interpreted as ``assert x,y``.

On the other hand, assert statements of this kind always pass, so they are
effectively not doing anything in user code. The authors of this document think
that this backwards incompatibility nature is beneficial, as it will highlight
these cases in user code while before they will have passed unnoticed. This case

> has already raised a :exc:`SyntaxWarning` since Python 3.10, therefore these
> cases are expected to be rare, as they require users to ignore existing
> syntax warnings. The continued raising of a :exc:`!SyntaxWarning` should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has already raised a :exc:`SyntaxWarning` since Python 3.10, so there was a deprecation period of
over 5 years. The continued raising of a :exc:`!SyntaxWarning` should
```

mitigate surprises.

The change will also result in changes to the AST of ``assert (x,y)``,
which currently is:

.. code-block:: text

    Module(
        body=[
            Assert(
                test=Tuple(
                    elts=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Load()),
                        Name(id='y', ctx=Load())],
                    ctx=Load()))],
        type_ignores=[])

the final implementation, in Python 3.18, will result in the following AST:

.. code-block:: text

    Module(
        body=[
            Assert(
                test=Name(id='x', ctx=Load()),
                msg=Name(id='y', ctx=Load()))],

>         type_ignores=[])

Reviewer: Will the `paren_syntax` argument/attribute of `ast`'s `Assert` be removed in 3.18? That would be another backwards-incompatible change :(
